Typography

use 15-25 px font size
use (really) big font sizes for headlines (ie. 60px 90px)
use line spacing between 120% and 150% of font size
	100% makes the text too dense and 200% makes the font too spaced out and difficult to read.
45-90 characters per line is ideal for reading.  (if it is only text)
use good fonts
	san serif: More neutral, clean, simple and modern websites
		good open source fonts: Open Sans, Lato, Raleway, Monsterrat, PT Sans
	serif: Traditional purposes, storytelling and long reading
		good serif fonts: Cardo, Merriweather, PT Serrif
Chose a font which reflects the look and feel you want for your website
Decide: sans-serif or serif typeface
use a good font
use only that one typeface


Color

Use only one base color (not black, white, or shade of grey)
Create color pallet for your design.  FlatUIColors
Use color wheel tool if you want to use more colors
Use a second color to draw attention
Never use black in your design (black doesn't occur in nature)
Choose colors wisely (that get's the desired response from audience)
	Red is a great color to use when power, passion, strength and excitement want to be transmitted. Brighter tones are more energetic and darker shades are more powerful and elegant.
	Orange draws attention without being as overpowering as red. It means cheerfulness and creativity. Orange can be associated with friendliness, confidence, and courage.
	Yellow is energetic and gives the feeling of happiness and liveliness. Also, it associates with curiosity, intelligence, brightness, etc.
	Green is the color of harmony, nature, life and health. Also, it is often associated with money. In design, green can have a balancing and harmonizing effect.
	Blue means patience, peace, trustworthiness, and stability. It is one of the most beloved colors, especially by men. It is associated with professionalism, trust and honor. That's actually why the biggest social networks use blue.
	Purple is traditionally associated with power, nobility and wealth. In your design, purple can give a sense of wisdom, royalty, nobility, luxury, and mystery.
	Pink expresses romance, passivity, care, peace, affection, etc.
	Brown is the color of relaxation and confidence. Brown means earthiness, nature, durability, comfort, and reliability.


Text

Overlay a color to make text more readable
Use a text box to show text better.
Blur the images
Floor Fade - images fades to black towards the bottom.  Increases text redability at the bottom.



Working with Icons

use icons to show features of a website
use icons for actions or links
	Icons should be recognizable
	label your icons
	should not take center stage in design
	use icon fonts whenever possible (vector images)


White Space
	key to create clean and simple look and feel.
	put whitespace between elements, groups of elemetns and website sections
	Whitespace describes invisible relationships between elements of website.
	Define where you want audience to look first
	estabilsh a flow that corresponds to your content's message
	use whitespace to build that flow.

User Experience
	Uesr's Goals and Business Goals need to align.

Inspiration


Responsive webdesign
	Website will work well on any screen and any resolution
	1. Fluid Grid: all layout elements are sized in relative units, such as percentages, instead of absolute units like pixels.
	2. Flexible Images: are also sized in relative units
	3. Media Queries: allow us to specify different CSS style rules for different browser widths.